---
title: 2009 Bicycle Tour of Colorado
date: 2009-07-02 10:58:34.000000000 -07:00
type: post
categories: [cycling, sports]
tags: [fun]
author: chadwick
permalink: "/2009/07/02/2009-bicycle-tour-of-colorado/"
---
During the week of June 21st I participated in the 2009 [Bicycle Tour of
Colorado](http://www.bicycletourcolorado.com/). This was my first true bicycle
tour, having previously only ridden in two-day events. We rode in a loop
around the [Gunnison National Forest](http://www.fs.fed.us/r2/gmug/) in
central Colorado and put in approximately 500 miles in 6 days of riding. The
tour was brutal, difficult, treacherous and totally awesome.

The tour began in the town of [Glenwood
Springs](http://www.ci.glenwood-springs.co.us/). We checked in on Saturday,
June 20th at [Sopris Elementary School](http://ses.rfsd.k12.co.us/) in town.

# Training

I had not planned on doing this bicycle tour at the beginning of the year, it
was always just in the back of my mind as something I'd like to do someday. I
did spend my spring training for the [April MS 150
ride](http://www.nationalmssociety.org/chapters/bp-ms-150/index.aspx) between
Houston and Austin, and between that training and rides since, managed to put
in about 800 miles of riding before I decided to sign up for the tour.

After signing up, I began to ride more in the Austin area to get more time on
hills. The Austin area has amazing hills to climb, and although they can be
quite steep, none are very long. Would it be enough training to tackle the big
mountains in Colorado?

One area of concern for me was the gearing situation on my bike and the
ability to carry enough gear. My road bike has a standard double crankset with
53/39 gearing, and an 12-25 10-speed cassette. I was advised by a few folks in
Austin that changing out the cassette to an 12-27 gearing would make climbing
the hills a lot easier, so I went ahead and did that. I was still concerned
about having a standard double crankset instead of a compact double, which
would have given me 50/34 gearing choices.

Carrying enough gear was also a concern, as the tour organizers make a big
point that you carry rain gear with you always. I normally ride with very
little equipment, nor do I need much here in Texas. But a touring ride in the
mountains is a different matter altogether, and I was pondering taking my
touring bike so I could make use of its rear rack for extra carrying capacity.
It also has a compact crankset which would give me more gearing choices for
the steep climbs.

In the end, I decided to buy a small [Camelback
Lobo](http://www.camelbak.com/sports-recreation/hydration-packs/lobo.aspx)
backpack so I could carry my rain gear in it, along with extra water and
supplies. I had not used one before, and didn't like the idea, but it actually
fit comfortably and did not seem to impact my aerodynamics at all while
wearing it.

# The Ride

## Day 1 - Glenwood Springs to Hotchkiss[![]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/images/3672212892_4465c1d728_m.jpg "McClure Pass climb")](http://www.flickr.com/photos/26521676@N00/3672212892/)

We left Glenwood Springs on the [Rio Grande
Trail](http://www.aspentimes.com/article/20080605/RECREATION04/808089755/1030&parentprofile=1065)
before getting on Colorado 82, heading south towards Aspen. At Carbondale, we
turned onto Colorado 133 to follow the [West Elk
Loop](http://www.colorado.com/Articles.aspx?aid=42089) up and over [McClure
Pass](http://www.allaspen.com/attractions/mcclure_pass.php) with a summit at
8,755 ft. While not a very high pass, the approach road is at a 8% grade for 3
miles, so it was a great first day introduction to serious hill climbing in
Colorado.

I found during this climb that the gearing setup on my bike was not optimal
for the Colorado mountains. It was neigh impossible to spin at a fast cadence
when climbing this steeply, so instead I would up falling back to pushing hard
up the hill. The end result was a climb of only about 5 to 6 MPH and a lot
more wear & tear on my knees. I spent a lot of the rest of the trip taking
ibuprofen and icing my left knee to keep swelling down.

![]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/images/3671407207_f1b4067d90_m.jpg "McClure Pass
Summit")Once we reached the top, it was time for a snack before we descended
and focused on getting to the town of Hotchkiss. The descent road was
wonderfully smooth with plenty of sight distance, so there was no problem
reaching a good speed; I hit 44 MPH on this stretch.

After the steep part of the descent, Colorado 133 meanders past Paonia State
Park which has a wonderful lake along the road for some great scenery. From
here we continued on past several small towns before ending up in Hotchkiss
for the evening.

The ride took me 5 hours, 25 minutes with 78.6 miles covered and 3,620 ft
ascent. Thanks to a fast, long descent, my average speed on the day was 15.8
MPH. Afterward, I was naturally tired but felt good and enjoyed the great
ride.

## Day 2 - Hotchkiss to Grand Junction

We left Hotchkiss on Monday morning on what promised to be the most difficult
ride of the tour. Not only did we have over 90 miles to cover, we had the long
climb over [Grand Mesa](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Grand_Mesa).

We climbed about 1,000 ft just to get from Hotchskiss to the first aid station
and the real start of the cli ![]({{ site.baseurl
}}/assets/images/3672217648_363fcc65af_m.jpg "Grand Mesa Summit")mb. From
there, we had 20 miles of steep, circuitous climbing on a relatively hot day.
This was a difficult climb for me and took much, much longer than I expected.

Once on top, we found that the aid station was running out of food and just
about to shutdown for the day, even though there were still a few hundred
riders coming up the mountain. Luckily, a family took advantage of the captive
audience and was selling snacks; I was quite happy to spend the $2 on a nice
bagel loaded with cream cheese.

After leaving the summit of the climb, we meandered a bit past some of the
beautiful lakes on top of the mesa. Then it was time for the descent. The
descent road was wonderful: smooth, not too curvy, and very long. I reached a
top speed of 51 MPH on this stretch. ![]({{ site.baseurl
}}/assets/images/3671411589_64c375512e_m.jpg "View from the top of Grand
Mesa")

After the descent, Colorado 65 meanders down and into the town of Mesa. From
here, we followed the road into a small canyon carved out by [Plateau
Creek](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Plateau_Creek_(Colorado)). The scenery
here was incredible, but unfortunately came with the price of a harsh, hot and
steady headwind the entire distance. Coming out of this canyon we emerge into
[De Beque Canyon](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/De_Beque_Canyon), where Plateau
Creek joins the [Colorado
River](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Colorado_River_(U.S.)). Unfortunately this
also meant we had to get onto Interstate 70 for 4 miles. Riding on the
shoulder of&nbsp; an Interstate Highway sucks about as much as you would
imagine, if not more.

After leaving I-70 we only had 10 or so more miles before arriving into Grand
Junction. This ride was without a doubt the hardest physical activity I have
done in my life. I was utterly exhausted and depleted after such a brutal
ride. I spent 8 hours, 35 minutes on the bike with 94 miles covered and a
whopping 6,600 ft total ascent on the day. My average speed was a dismal 12.4
MPH.

I had a terrible headache once I reached town and was clearly dehydrated,
despite drinking and eating everything in sight for the entire day. I decided
that evening to not ride on day 3 and just SAG out, but my plans for that were
somewhat thwarted the next day.

## Day 3 - Grand Junction to Montrose

Our third day was considered an easy travel day, with a relatively flat and
short ride ~60 mile ride from Grand Junction to Montrose. For those feeling up
to it, there was an optional ~40-mile loop through the Colorado National
Monument. I really wanted to ride through the monument but after day 2 I was
too exhausted to try.

I decide to take the SAG truck to the finish as soon as I could, but it was
difficult to actually find one. I wound up biking to aid station 3 and only
skipping the last 15 miles or so of the ride. I felt absolutely terrible the
entire time I was on the bike this day, so the short distance and extra rest
time was something I needed.

## Day 4 - Montrose to Crested Butte

![]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/images/3672219600_7fa97ea9cf_m.jpg "Blue Mesa")

I felt refreshed after a short day 3 and ready to tackle the long ride to
Crested Butte. We climbed over two short mountains today, Cerro Summit and
Blue Mesa Summit. There was a strong headwind coming out of Montrose that made
the first 20 miles of the day rather difficult until reaching Cerro Summit.
After that point, the rest of the day was calm, warm and quite a pleasant
ride.

The scenery on the climb up Blue Mesa was amazing. The valleys surrounding the
summit were gentle rolling hills covered with lush grasses and grazing
animals. The vibrant colors were amazing to look at, and unfortunately the
camera doesn't quite capture the beauty.

![]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/images/3672220950_a71d149b7c_m.jpg "Curecanti National Recreation Area")After descending from Blue Mesa Summit we descending past [Black Canyon National Park](http://www.nps.gov/blca/) and [Curecanti National Recreation Area](http://www.nps.gov/cure/). The lakes making up the recreation area were mirror smooth and amazing to look at, and made for a fun ride through the canyons.

After leaving the canyons we reached the town of Gunnison and turned off
Colorado 50 onto Colorado 135 to start our climb to the town of Crested Butte.
It wasn't a steep climb, but the long day began to take its toll on me and it
took quite a while to finish up this last section. The last 15 miles into town
it began to cloud over and get much cooler as we approached the higher
altitudes of the area.

Today I spent 8 hours 15 minutes on the bike over 90.7 miles with 6,120 ft
total ascent. My average speed was a slow 12.4 MPH with a max of 39.3 MPH.

## Day 5 - Crested Butte

![]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/images/3672223240_bf50b6b911_m.jpg "Crested Butte")

This day was a rest day for us, and we had the day free to explore the town of
Crested Butte. The [Fat Tire Bike
Week](http://www.cbchamber.com/page.php?pname=events/member/ftbw) was underway
while we there, and many folks took the chance to rent a mountain bike and
explore the great trails of the area. I fully took advantage of the day off
and did absolutely nothing, save walk around the town a bit and catch up on
laundry and eating.

Crested Butte seemed fairly typical of a small Colorado mountain town. There
were just a few shops, mostly either gifts, restaurants, or adventure shops.
The town of Mt. Crested Butte just up the hill is home to the ski resort of
the area, whereas the main town seems to be more of the mountain biking mecca.

The day off really made a difference to my mood and physical well-being. The
few hours extra sleep seemed to do wonders for my overall stamina and I was
ready to tackle the next couple of days to finish out the tour.

## Day 6 - Crested Butte to Buena Vista

![]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/images/3672229528_6460477e1f_m.jpg "Taylor Park
Reservoir")Day 6 promised to be one of the best days of the tour. We were
climbing over Cottonwood Pass, the highest pass of our trip at 12,126 ft
elevation. But first, we had to get out of rested Butte and travel through
Taylor Canyon. This part of the ride was amazing. The 15 or so miles leaving
Crested Butte made for a fast downhill sprint to the small town of Almont,
where we turned off Colorado 135 and onto CR 742 that followed the Taylor
River into the canyon.

Once reaching the [Taylor Park
Dam](http://www.usbr.gov/projects/Facility.jsp?fac_Name=Taylor%20Park%20Dam)
and climbing over it, we were presented with what was probably the most
gorgeous view of the entire tour: the mountains reflecting off the Taylor Park
Reservoir.

After resting at our second aid station of the day, it was time to begin the
climb over [Cottonwood
Pass](http://maps.google.com/maps?f=q&source=s_q&hl=en&q=Cottonwood+Pass,+Chaffee,+Colorado+81211&sll=37.0625,-95.677068&sspn=51.177128,75.498047&ie=UTF8&cd=1&geocode=Ff12UAIdGFOo-Q&split=0&ll=38.82794,-106.409454&spn=0.39691,0.589828&t=p&z=11).
This part of the ride promised to a fun one, if for no other reason than the
road on this side of Cottonwood Pass was a 13 mile stretch of packed dirt.
Everyone who hadn't done it before was concerned that skinny road bike tires
weren't going to be the best choice but the experienced locals said not to
worry about it. In fact, they were quite right as this road was much more
enjoyable to ride on than the chip & seal asphalt we were greeted with most of
the rest of the day.

![]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/images/3671427237_d96b7209f0_m.jpg "Cottonwood
Pass")Like all mountain pass roads, Cottonwood Pass was steep, but not quite
as steep as I had expected. With my rest day and the smooth packed dirt, I
made decent time up the pass. Mother nature had a sense of humor, however, and
I was given a nice rainstorm to ride through as soon as I began the climb. I
went ahead and put on all of my rain gear in case, and it turned out to be a
good plan. As we climbed the mountain the storm took a turn for the worse and
soon the weather was amazingly bad. As we neared the top of the pass we fully
ascended into the clouds. At this point I couldn't see very far in front of me
from the heavy rain and the cloud cover, at a time when the switchbacks of the
pass were steep and dangerous.

![]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/images/3672234702_dd783b961c_m.jpg "Cottonwood
Pass")At this point the rain finally soaked through my shoe covers and through
my gloves. With that and the temperature dropping into the 40s I finally began
to get a bit cold. Luckily I had 5 layers of clothing on my core so overall I
was quite comfortable. I had decided not to descend down the other side unless
I could dry out, but the tour folks had their own ideas. As soon as I reached
the top I was asked to put down my bike and climb into one of the luggage
trucks with 50 or so other rides so they could bring us down the mountain.
They were shutting down the aid station on top of the pass with the intent no
one would ride down during the storm. I talked to a few folks who had begun
the climb down right as the rainstorm started and they had a terrible ride
down the mountain into town.

This was one of those days that can only be described as epic, despite the
tendency for cyclists to overuse the term. It was truly an amazingly fun
experience climbing up Cottonwood Pass in a storm like that. I think I had
more fun doing that climb than anything else in the trip. But then, I was well
clothed. I passed several people wearing only their summer clothes plus arm
warmers and there was quite a bit of whimpering and some crying as they got
wetter and colder.

By the time we arrived in [Buena Vista](http://www.buenavistacolorado.org/)
the storm had moved on, but our camping area had received quite a bit of rain
itself. Luckily the [Shuttleguy](http://www.shuttleguy.com/) folks were on it
and made sure our luggage was covered before anything got too wet.

Today I spent 5 hours 39 minutes on the bike over 54.9 miles with 4,540 ft
ascent. With no descent to pick it up, my average was only 11.4 MPH.

## Day 7 - Buena Vista to Glenwood Springs

Our final day was also our longest, with over 100 miles on tap including a
climb over [Independence Pass](http://www.independence-pass.com/). We had a
quick 20 mile ride out of Buena Vista before aid station 1 and the start of
the climb. The weather promised to stay clear until the afternoon so many
rides left even earlier than they normally do. I made it out of camp at 0600
instead of my normal 0700 for that very reason. At aid station 1 I was
somewhat surprised to see large numbers of rides queuing up for the SAG wagon
to skip the ride up the pass.

![]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/images/3671433361_319df6e5b6_m.jpg "Independence
Pass")The scenery along the road up to Independence Pass was amazing. The
foliage was lush and vibrant and we were constantly surrounded by tall
mountains on every side. As we neared the top of the pass, we ascending passed
the tree line and into banks of leftover snow. The scenery would have been
similar on Cottonwood Pass, if not for the torrential downpour.

The climb up Independence Pass was quite steep and difficult. The final mile
especially was steep but knowing we were almost over the last climb of the
tour made many of us pick up the tempo to make it to the top as fast as
possible - okay in my case that meant a whopping 8 MPH instead of the 5 MPH I
had been doing.

![]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/images/3671437277_b11c5c659b_m.jpg "Independence
Pass")The top of Independence Pass is alpine tundra which is always amazing to
see, especially this far south in the hemisphere. The weather stayed clear the
entire climb, and finally started to warm, so we had plenty of time to queue
up for pictures in front of the sign at the top of the pass. Afterward, it was
time for our rapid descent into the town of Aspen.

Unfortunately, Colorado 82 heading towards Aspen is in horrible condition. The
road is full of potholes and bumps, making for a dangerous descent. The tour
folks did a good job with warning markers on the road, but instead of what
promised to be a good 50+ MPH descent, I had to limit it to no more than 40
MPH. At one point on the road we reached a section called The Narrows, where
two lanes became one, and road traffic on both sides queues up slowly. This is
certainly not the idea scenario for a fast descent off a mountain.

For some odd reason, the tour put aid station 3 15 miles from aid station 2 on
the descent, which was effectively useless. I used it to get out of my warm
clothes, but we had 40 miles left before reaching Glenwood Springs and there
were no aid stations lined up for us on that stretch. That said, the entire
remaining route was downhill and made for some fairly fast average speeds,
even though we were fighting a headwind the entire way.

On this final day I spent 7 hours 58 minutes on the bike over 101.9 miles with
4,900 ft total ascent. My average speed was 14.1 MPH with a maximum of 40.7
MPH.

# Reflections

On gearing: while changing the rear cassette to an 12-27 was a great idea,
having a standard double crankset was not such a great idea. I paid attention
to riders as we went past each other to see what gearing they had on their
bikes. Very few riders had a standard crankset and, of the ones I talked to,
they were all Colorado locals. Almost everyone had either a triple or compact
double crankset. In 2009, [Shimano](http://www.shimano.com/) released a [new
Dura-Ace line](http://www.velonews.com/article/76923) with a 50/34 compact
double crankset and an 11-28 10-speed cassette, which would be a wonderful
choice for touring bikes. I know what my next component set will be.

On equipment: the Camelback backpack was a great choice, although I would
still prefer not to have to carry one. The extra water capacity came in handy
since the tour does not really have as many aid stations as they needed on the
routes. I could have gotten by with shoving all of my gear into my jersey or
jacket pockets, but I find that to be very uncomfortable as it puts odd
pressure points in your clothing. I'm also rather cold-natured, so I needed a
bit more layering than most people riding it seemed.

On altitude: I was surprised, but the altitude was not much of an issue for
me. Yes, I had diminished performance capacity, but I wasn't trying to race up
the mountains so it didn't impact me much. The gearing made it difficult to
spin, so perhaps with better acclimation I could have used more aerobic
capacity to push harder in the climbs, but I suspect this was more a muscle
issue than an aerobic one.

On the tour: the tour itself was great fun, but overall I'd give it a B- for
organization. Anything like this is a difficult logistical challenge, but the
organizers made some clear mistakes. Some rides needed more aid stations, or
at least aid stations in different locations. The choice of food service
vendors was rather poor, and no one seemed really happy with the food
availability. Even though I prepaid for all 3 meals a day, I wound up eating
in town towards the end of the tour just to escape the poor quality food. And
finally, there were some pretty major errors in the presented maps to us that
caused a lot of people grief. Those kinds of mistakes happen, but they can be
costly to the unprepared...

I heard many of the locals say that the [Ride the
Rockies](http://www.ridetherockies.com/) ride was a much better organized, and
fun ride than this tour. They have a lottery to get into the ride, so that's
probably a sign in itself. That ride is better funded and is more appealing to
more casual riders. One big benefit is they have aid stations more frequently
and the word is they are much better stocked. Many of the riders I met had
just finished that ride a few days before starting this tour, quite a feat.

One thing I was surprised about was the number of people who seemed unclear on
the concept that something like a week long bicycle tour is an adventure,
rather than a pampered vacation. You need to have the right attitude for
something like this: things will go wrong, mistakes will be made, amenities
will be missing. It sucks when anything happens, but it inevitably will. There
were way too many people whining about the smallest things, or things that
clearly they needed to be prepared for. If you do something like this, and
especially if you are camping, you need to be prepared and bring some extra
food, toilet paper, etc.

And finally, one big thing to keep in mind on these kinds of rides is not to
let the douchbags ruin your fun. In every walk of life there are people that
are either intentionally douchbags or just occasionally make mistakes and turn
into one for a while. This tour was no exception. Don't let these people get
to you or they will ruin your fun and your vacation; they are far and few
between but they are there. You are the one that chooses how to react to their
behavior, so choose wisely and you will have a much better time.

All of the pictures from my ride are available on [my Flickr site
here](http://www.flickr.com/photos/26521676@N00/sets/72157620584199539/
"Pictures from the Trip (Flickr)").

