---
title: 'Review: Garmin Forerunner 310XT'
date: 2009-08-23 22:33:27.000000000 -07:00
type: post
categories: [cycling, running, sports, technology]
tags: [gps]
author: chadwick
permalink: "/2009/08/23/review-garmin-forerunner-310xt/"
---
![]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/images/3850263793_20ffeae36a.jpg "Garmin
Forerunner 310XT")I recently purchased a [Garmin Forerunner
310XT](https://buy.garmin.com/shop/shop.do?pID=27335&ra=true) training device
for use while running, cycling, and hopefully swimming. The Forerunner 310XT
is a new device from Garmin, and their first multi-sport device that is
waterproof and can be used for swimming, and thus triathlons.

For the past several years I have been using a Polar S725X multi-sport
training device for both running and cycling. The rest of this review will
compare and contrast to the Polar device since that is what I am most
familiar. I have not used other GPS-based training devices before, so
comparisons with those are left as an exercise for the readers.

The 310XT uses GPS to calculate your location and speed. You can then upload
your data via your computer to [Garmin's Connect
website](http://connect.garmin.com/), [Garmin's Training Center
software](http://www.garmin.com/products/trainingcenter/), or other
third-party options. After uploading you can view a map of your route,
categorize and describe your activity. With the Connect website, you can
easily share your activity via variety of methods, and even export the route
into [Google Earth](http://earth.google.com/).

Like most of Garmin's training devices, you can pair the 310XT with a variety
of other devices that communicate using the [ANT+
Sport](http://www.thisisant.com/ant/ant-in-sport) protocol. The 310XT will
receive and record data from heart-rate monitors, bicycle speed & cadence
sensors, foot-pods, and even power meters such as the
[PowerTap](http://www.cycleops.com/products/power-meters.html).&nbsp;The
collected data is then joined with your route data and transmitted along with
it.

![]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/images/3851058724_09d59988ea.jpg "GSC-10
Speed/Cadence sensor")The bicycle sensor option from Garmin is a combination
speed & cadence sensor that mounts on the rear chainstay. This design allows
one sensor unit to have two separate magnets for both the crank and the rear
wheel. Compared to the Polar solution, this is much cleaner and easier to
mount than two separate sensor units. The Polar cadence sensor, especially, is
difficult to mount on some of the modern carbon downtubes, so the Garmin
solution is a welcome change.

The speed sensor augments the GPS data so that accurate speed is recorded even
when GPS signal is not available or accurate.&nbsp; Garmin also sells an
optional foot pod sensor that accomplishes the same when running without GPS
signal, such as inside on a treadmill. I haven't used this sensor yet as where
I have run has had great GPS reception thus far.

I used a foot pod sensor with my Polar to keep track of my speed and distance
while running. The downside of this type of solution is the relative
inaccuracy of the data. I'd often see 10 to 20% margin of error, even after
calibrating the foot pod.

My concern with a GPS-based training device would be the accuracy of the
signal, especially when running under under a lot of foliage. So far, the
310XT has proven itself more than capable in this regard, and much better than
other GPS devices I have used in the past. Viewing the recorded route data
I've found very little error in position so far, and only a little bit with
elevation, even when running underneath trees and bridges.

Like all GPS devices, the 310XT must determine its position when it is powered
on. If you start up the 310XT inside, or where there is poor GPS signal, it
can take a very long time to determine initial position, if it all. This can
be an annoyance when you're ready to start your training and you don't have a
solid 3-dimensional fix yet. The 310XT lets you begin your timer and start
your activity before it has GPS signal, but it can sometimes take surprisingly
long to get that initial fix. Another disadvantage of not having a fix is you
won't have accurate local time until then, either.

The Garmin 310XT has a rechargeable battery, but battery life is only
approximately 20 hours of usage. My Polar S725X, by comparison, has a
watch-style battery that has lasted over 5 years. In practice, a rechargeable
battery solution works great, but may present a problem on multi-day
activities where there is no opportunity to recharge.

Transmitting the data from the training device to your computer is done via a
USB dongle that uses the ANT protocol. Garmin provides drivers and software
for both PCs running Windows and Macs running OS X. The Polar solution uses an
infrared based receiver that is much more difficult to work with as it
requires line of sight between the training device and the infrared receiver,
and Polar does not provide a software option for Macs.

For most users, Garmin's software solutions are stellar compared to Polar's.
The big win here is Garmin's Connect website which allows you to easily view
your data online, share it with friends, and upload your data from a variety
of different computers. [Sharing your
data](http://connect.garmin.com/activity/11656145) is trivial, and allows your
friends to view your routes, as well as being able to search for routes from
others near you. The Connect website represents a modern solution for the
social Internet, a great solution for most users.

Where the Polar software shines is for advanced heart-rate based training,
especially with coaching assistance. Polar's software is designed to easily
share your data with a coach and receive training programs with them.
Additionally, both the software and the Polar device have much more advanced
features for heart-rate based training. For example, with the Polar I can run
several tests to determine if I am over-training, or even what an estimate of
my current VO2max. The Garmin solution only has different heart rate zones,
more than adequate for most users, but you do get the impression the Polar has
more science behind it.

The 310XT supports multiple bike settings, each with its own odometer. I find
this feature in particular compelling as I like to keep track of my mileage
for each bike separately, and as far as I could tell the Polar S725X always
combined bike mileage for all bikes it had configured, rather than a separate
odometer for each one. With the GPS based tracking, you don't even necessarily
need a speed/cadence sensor and you can still keep track of your bike's
mileage. This is especially compelling for mountain biking, where the rough
trails often render a traditional bike computer useless.

So far, the Garmin Forerunner 310XT has been a fantastic training tool and I
haven't missed using the Polar S725X yet.

