---
title: The BP MS 150
date: 2009-04-20 10:21:48.000000000 -07:00
type: post
categories: [cycling, sports]
tags: []
author: chadwick
permalink: "/2009/04/20/the-bp-ms-150-2/"
---
The weekend of April 18th & 19th, 2009, was the 25th annual [MS 150
ride](http://www.nationalmssociety.org/chapters/bp-ms-150/index.aspx "MS 150
web site") from Houston to Austin. This year's ride promised to be a great
one, but unfortuantely mother nature threw a kink in all of the plans.

On Friday, April 17th, a cold front rolled through central Texas and parked
itself over La Grange, where the overnight camping grounds for the big ride
are. During the day on Friday conditions got so bad the MS Society cancelled
day one of the ride.

While everyone was bummed, we wound up having extremely heavy rain all day
Saturday so the ride would have been a horrible mess and likely would have
kept the majority of riders from actually participating.

The logistics of the day 2 ride were worked out during Friday and Saturday and
we were to start from La Grange's town square early Sunday morning. From
there, the route would follow the normal day 2 route into Austin.

Getting to La Grange early Sunday morning wasn't too bad, and parking was no
problem at all. Not surprisingly, a stiff north wind followed the cold front
so we had to ride into the wind almost the entire time. It seemed worse than
the wind of [2008's ride](http://chadgibbons.com/2008/04/14/the-bp-ms-150/),
but it's hard to know for sure. The only real respite from the wind was the
section of the course between Buescher and Bastop state parks.

The MS Society said 11,000 riders rode on day 2, out of the 13,000 registered;
that is just amazing given the logistics of getting up to La Grange and the
promise of a very windy day.

I set a new low in training miles leading up to the ride, only 594 miles since
January. For comparison, I did just over 1,000 for last year's ride. But, this
year I added spin class to the training schedule so I probably had more total
seat time than last year.

