---
title: My Houston Marathon Experience
date: 2009-01-20 23:23:45.000000000 -08:00
type: post
categories: [fun, running, sports]
tags: [ache, food, marathon, massage]
author: chadwick
permalink: "/2009/01/20/my-houston-marathon-experience/"
---
On January 18th, 2009 I ran the [Chevron Houston
Marathon](http://www.chevronhoustonmarathon.com/) - my first full marathon -
and finished in [4 hours, 54 minutes and 42
seconds](http://www.runpix.info/hou09/42/finord.php?LastName=gibbons&lan=&aset=1
"My Results").

## The Event

[![2009 Chevron Houston Marathon Course Map]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/images/2009-course-map1-300x231.png "2009-course-map1")

The full and half marathon events began at the same time with groups separated
into two waves. The second wave, which I was in, began 10 minutes after the
first wave. The half marathon group started a block away from the full, but
joined back up at mile two.

Both the full and half marathon events start and finish at Houston's [George
R. Brown Convention Center](http://www.houstonconventionctr.com/). The course
winds through [The
Heights](http://www.houston.com/houston-neighborhoods/heightsneighborhood.html)
neighborhood, through the [Montrose
district](http://www.houston.com/houston-neighborhoods/montroseneighborhood.html),
meanders through the Rice University area, leaves the loop 610 boundary for
The Galleria and Tanglewilde districts before turning to downtown via the
[Memorial Park](http://www.houstontx.gov/parks/memorialpark.html) area.

My plan was to find the runners in the 4 hour, 15 minute pace group and stick
with them throughout the run. I intended to use the [Jeff Galloway
technique](http://www.jeffgalloway.com/training/walk_breaks.html) of running a
few minutes followed by a brief walk. At my pace, he recommends a 4 minute run
followed by a 1 minute walk. This pattern is supposed to be repeated until
approximately mile 18 where you can then turn on the steam and finish strong.
In theory, that is.

As it turned out, I immediately lost sight of my pace leaders even though I
was perhaps only 25 yards behind them at the starting gun. The sheer mass of
people made it difficult to go the full pace for the first three miles. The
massive crowd also made it difficult to start the run/walk cycle right from
the beginning, although I did pick it up around mile three.

Between miles 5 and 6 we ran in The Heights neighborhood, and right along the
two streets that border my parents' street, so they came out to see me run
past. About this point I ran into - no pun intended - a few of the runners
from my running group that run about the same pace I do in training. I started
maintaining a running pace that stayed with them and we each began to push the
pace a little faster as the crowd thinned out some. This is telling from the
result data... over the first 6.2 miles I averaged 5.9 mph or a 10 minute, 7
second per mile pace. During the next 6.2 miles my average pace was 6.0 mph or
a 9 minute, 57 second per mile pace - right where I wanted to be.

At mile nine, in the Montrose district, the half-marathon group reached their
turn-around point and suddenly the streets became a whole lot less crowded.
The spectators thinned out as well, although still remained thick and loud
throughout most of the remainder of the course when located on residential
streets. The effects of a cheering crowd in an event like this cannot be
underestimated. All of the runners have their names printed on their bibs, so
you literally have thousands of people calling out your name as you run by;
never underestimate the power a flirting woman cheering a name can have on the
competitive male psyche!

![Almost Halfway]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/images/44644-2793-002f-199x300.jpg "44644-2793-002f")

I finished the first half of the marathon within 30 seconds of my previous two
half marathons I ran in October. That lifted my spirits but fatigue began to
set in a few miles later. Just after the 14 mile point we turned onto Westpark
and climbed a very large overpass. We also left the residential neighborhoods
for a few miles so the combination of the distance, lack of cheering and
fatigue of the hill climb finally got to me and I dropped off the pace. The
next seven miles proved the most difficult of the race; during my 13.1 to 18.6
mile split I averaged only 5.3 mph or an 11 minute, 18 second per mile pace.

At around the 18.6 (30K) mile point to mile 20 I reevaluated how I'd run the
rest of the course. Unlike many of the training runs, I had not
[bonked](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bonk_(condition)) but rather muscle
fatigue had set in. I decided to take it easy, concentrate on finishing well,
and walk as much as I needed to. I did find that keeping a relatively fast
running pace felt better than a slower one, but I had to walk much more often
to recover. As a result, my last split time was only an average of 4.5 mph or
a glacial 13 minute, 17 second per mile pace.

Around mile 20 the race officials also changed the flag risk from green (run
as planned) to yellow (ensure adequate fluids and cooling; slow pace as heat
increased) as the temperature approached 70 degrees. It really was a near
perfect weather day, except runners would really prefer it to be 20 or 30
degrees cooler than that for racing.&nbsp; I felt comfortable and cool enough,
but noticed I was running slower with the same heart rate as I was earlier in
the day (which I try and keep between 160 and 165 during a race).

During the last three miles the head coach of my running group, along with the
coach of my pace group and several other members of the group caught up to me
and did their best to encourage us to keep up and finish strong. I picked up
the pace for a little while but fatigue won out and they wound up passing me
around mile 25. In the end they finished just under two minutes ahead of me,
but it was neigh impossible to keep up at that point.

It really was a wonderful experience crossing the finish line of a marathon.
It was tough, although I think my first 100 mile bicycle ride years before was
probably a tougher challenge. I was not nearly as exhausted as I thought I
would be, although that should not underscore just how amazingly worn out I
really was.

## After the Finish

![Still Alive!]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/images/44644-273-021f-199x300.jpg)

Immediately after crossing the finish line the organizers herd you into an
area where you get a finisher photograph taken. After that you are brought
inside the George R. Brown, given your finisher medal and then herded over to
the medical area where you are weighed. They compare your weight after the
race to what you weighed the previous day when you picked up your packet at
the event expo. In my case, I was the same weight so they were concerned I
might have [hyponatremia](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hyponatremia).

They took me back into the medical area and had me fill out a questionnaire
with the gist being how much water&nbsp; you drank during the race and how you
feel. In my case, I felt great (sore muscles aside) and I had been using an
[electrolyte add-in](http://www.eletewater.com/) for my water during the
event. In fact, towards the end I suspected I needed more fluids than I had
drunk because I was covered in a thick layer of salt and I did not have to
urinate at all during the event. After checking out my questionnaire and
making sure I really felt okay they let me go, but this is an interesting data
point for me and future runs.

After that little distraction, which unfortunately took a half hour, it was
time to herd through the food area, get my finisher's t-shirt and other
goodies, pick up my checked baggage, change clothes and then find my friends.
They of course were terribly worried about me since they were not sure when I
crossed the finished line and then I was MIA for the extra half hour after I
did.

Once everything was squared away we left, found ourselves an IHOP for lunch
(mmm, pancakes and eggs!) and then went home. I treated myself to an ice bath
as soon as I got home, which was more enjoyable than it sounds, followed by a
wonderful shower and a slow, short bicycle ride in the park behind my
neighborhood. Amazingly, I didn't collapse into a coma as soon as I was done
with all of that but stayed up until a normal time, even though I had been up
since 3:30am.

One of the more amusing things to do after any endurance event like this is to
add up just what all you ate during the day. In my case:

1. Breakfast: banana protein cake
2. Pre-run: 1 [Gu packet](http://www.guenergy.com/products/gu-energy-gel)
3. During: 3 bags of [Clif Shot Bloks](http://www.clifbar.com/food/products_shot_bloks/), 2 bananas, 1 Gu packet, and 10 (!) cups of sports drink, plus about the same amount of water
4. Post-race: 1 slice pound cake, 1/4 bagel, 1/2 cup scrambled eggs, 1/2 cup potatoes
5. Lunch: 1/2 omelette and 1/2 harvest grain 'n nut pancakes @ [IHOP](http://www.ihop.com/)
6. Snack: cottage cheese, granola, and raisins
7. Dinner: banana protein cake

Wow! All of that sounds excessive but I likely did not really eat enough
during the day as my heart rate monitor reported a energy expenditure of 3,878
kilo calories during the marathon itself. And let's face it, you run a
marathon and it is pretty much a license to eat whatever you can handle that
day. I should have ordered a pizza!

The day after the marathon I found myself extremely sore, but not nearly as
much as I thought I would be. I was slow, but fully functional. I did notice
that as the day went on my entire back was highly sore, which is a new
experience for me.

Today, two days after, I was less sore but my muscles were still screaming at
me. It was time for a massage (which I stupidly scheduled in advance without
thinking it was the exact time of the presidential inauguration, whoops!).
Deep tissue massages are a bit sadomasochistic to begin with, but this one was
truly an amazing amount of pain. The old clich√© about muscles you didn't know
existing being sore was so true. Nevertheless, it is an amazing recovery tool
and I found myself feeling wonderful afterward. The muscles in the middle of
my back and my right shin were the most sore and the massage went a long way
to relieving their pain.

I am supposed to take a break from all exercise until Thursday, at which
point I can go for a short run or walk. This weekend the bicycling training
season begins anew, and a gentle ~40 mile ride in the country will likely be a
wonderful recovery tool as well.

## The Training

I started running in late April, 2008 after the [MS150 bike ride between
Houston and
Austin](http://www.nationalmssociety.org/chapters/bp-ms-150/index.aspx). My
cardiovascular conditioning after the bicycle training season was excellent,
which made pushing myself during the runs easy, but my running technique
itself was not sound. My good friend Teri noticed how I was running and
offered a few suggestions which dramatically changed how I ran and the impact
it had on my body. After that point, running became relatively easy.

I signed up with [Fort Bend Fit](http://www.fortbendfit.org/) to utilize their
training program for the 2009 Houston _half_-marathon. My training progressed
much faster than I expected and I ran my first [half-marathon in
Albuquerque](http://chadgibbons.com/2008/10/19/2008-duke-city-marathon/) in
October, followed by the warm-up [Houston
half-marathon](http://www.houstonhalf.com/) a week later. At that point, I
decided to switch to the full marathon race and continued to follow the full
marathon training program.

During the training season I ran 600.5 miles over 120 hours and 56 minutes,
expending a whopping 75,711 kilo calories - not including any of the
cross-training I did. The Fort Bend Fit training program was a full 28 weeks
long, making it possible for anyone to go from being able to do a 5K distance
to a full marathon during that time.

During the training season I ran 2 5K races, a 5 mile race, 2 half-marathons,
a 25K race and a 30K race, not to mention all of the nurmous additional
training runs in between.

It was a truely awesome experience.

## Now What?

The day of the marathon, and the following Monday, I had zero interest in ever
running another marathon. _Zero_. I like bicycling a whole lot more, and that
experience is a whole lot easier on your body (unless you crash). But today I
noticed I am already looking for future events and reading different recovery
scenarios for the first time marathoner. D'oh. Maybe I should just give in and
start doing triathlons. An ironman would be fun...

