---
title: Comparing the Garmin ForeRunner 310XT and Edge 500
date: 2010-12-13 13:58:01.000000000 -08:00
type: post
categories: [cycling, sports, technology]
tags: [athlete, bicycling, edfge, forerunner, garmin, gps, powertap, review, running]
author: chadwick
permalink: "/2010/12/13/comparing-the-garmin-forerunner-310xt-and-edge-500/"
---
In July, 2009 I started using a [Garmin Forerunner
310XT](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B0025VKW5K/ref=as_li_ss_tl?ie=UTF8&tag=thenucbun-20&linkCode=as2&camp=217145&creative=399349&creativeASIN=B0025VKW5K)
T to keep track of my workouts. At first I just used the running features of
the device, but shortly after I started using it for my cycling workouts as
well. Previously I had been using a Polar system for cycling data capture, and
soon I found the ForeRunner 310XT to be a better solution by far than the
Polar one (see [my previous
review](http://chadgibbons.com/2009/08/23/review-garmin-forerunner-310xt/) of
the ForeRunner 310XT for more details).

[Garmin Edge 500, Garmin ForeRunner 310XT and CycleOps PowerTap CPU]({{ site.baseurl
}}/assets/images/20101213_7891_800px1-300x225.jpg")

Starting in February, 2010, I added a power meter to my cycling gadget list,
and the ForeRunner proved a great partner to cycling with power, especially
when compared to the PowerTap CPU unit that came with the power meter. I found
the ForeRunner easy to use, accurate, and the integration with both [Garmin
Connect](http://connect.garmin.com/) and the software solutions from
[TrainingPeaks](http://home.trainingpeaks.com/) more useful and easier to use
than the other options.

In June, 2010, I rode the wonderful [Ride the
Rockies](http://chadgibbons.com/2010/07/14/2010-ride-the-rockies/) event in
Colorado and used the ForeRunner 310XT to track the entire week of riding. One
problem I discovered in an event like this is that the ForeRunner did not have
enough onboard memory to store the entire week’s worth of riding. I discovered
this before the trip and so I lugged a small netbook around with my camping
gear just so I could download data after the rides. Not quite the best way to
unplug on a holiday.

When Garmin announced the [Garmin Edge 500 Cycling
GPS](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B002O0QBE8/ref=as_li_ss_tl?ie=UTF8&tag=thenucbun-20&linkCode=as2&camp=217145&creative=399349&creativeASIN=B002O0QBE8)
it looked like a great solution for use on my bike. Since it was cycling
specific, it had a few more features designed for cycling, whereas the
ForeRunner 310XT was definitely intended to be used for multi-sport
activities. Since I’m always in need of a new gadget to play with, I went
ahead and bought one and started using it for cycling in August, 2010.

I’ve found it to be as good as promised, but there still are times when the
ForeRunner 310XT is a better choice. In the rest of this post, I’ll show you
the various differences between the two devices and how one might be better
than the other depending upon your circumstances.

* * *

## Memory Capacity

As the memory limitation of the ForeRunner 310XT was the first thing that made
me interested in the Edge 500, it’s good to start here. In my use, I’ve found
the ForeRunner only has enough onboard memory to store between 24 and 36 hours
of workouts - certainly not enough for a week long cycling tour. Garmin
doesn’t provide specifications on how much actually memory is installed on
this device, so it is a bit of a mystery to the actual capacity.

![]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/images/Screen-shot-2010-12-07-at-16.17.11.png "Garmin Edge 500 disk capacity")

Meanwhile, the Edge 500 has 56.4 MB&nbsp;of flash based storage, at least
according to my Mac’s view of it.&nbsp;I’ve got every cycling workout since I
started using the Edge still stored on it - about 50 hours worth so far - and
the device still has 48.7 MB of storage free! This is an amazing amount of
usable storage and means even the most active cyclists will find they have
room for months of data without issue. No need to take a laptop with you on
holiday!

Advantage: Edge 500, handily.

* * *

## Data Transfer

The data transfer mechanism is very different in the two devices. The
ForeRunner 310XT uses a wireless ANT+ based data transfer mechanism, while the
Edge 500 appears as a simple USB flash drive to your computer.

To exchange data between your computer and your ForeRunner 310XT you have to
use a ANT+ dongle provided by Garmin that connects to your computer’s USB port
along with a software application that provides drivers for the dongle. It
works, and depending upon your computer configuration it is easily a
setup-once-and-forget operation. You don’t need to plug in any more wires, and
you just bring your ForeRunner 310XT within a few feet of the dongle and you
are good to go.

In practice, though, this approach was not perfect. I found during my cycling
holiday that a cheap netbook did not have enough CPU performance to reliably
handle the data transfer job if it was not plugged into A/C power. That was a
surprise and made downloading data from the ForeRunner a hassle during my
trip, since I did not frequently have access to A/C power while camping out.

By comparison, the Edge 500 requires you to use a USB cable to physically plug
the Edge 500 unit directly to a USB port on your computer. The Edge then shows
up as USB flash disk, so once you are done you have to eject the device to
prevent your computer from complaining.

Because the Edge 500 uses a direct USB connection, it is much more reliable
and faster to do any data transfer than the ForeRunner 310XT. The USB cable is
not really any more or less hassle than the ANT+ dongle, so you aren’t gaining
a lot of advantage by having a wireless based data transfer mechanism.

Advantage: Edge 500, but just so.

* * *

## Charging

Directly related to the data transfer mechanism is how the devices are
charged. Both devices can be charged via a USB connection to a computer, or
using a USB to A/C adaptor, which Garmin provides.

The primary difference here is that the ForeRunner 310XT requires a large
binder-like clip that grabs onto the unit and touches two electrical
connectors on the rear of the unit. Meanwhile, the Edge 500 simply uses the
same USB connection for data transfer. This means a lot less bulk when
traveling.

Garmin provides an excellent A/C adaptor system that includes several
international wall-plug adaptors as part of their standard kit for both
devices, so you're set for all kinds of power scenarios.

Advantage: Edge 500.

* * *

## Battery Life

How about battery life? Garmin says the ForeRunner 310XT’s battery life is up
to 20 hours, and the Edge 500’s is up to 18 hours. In my experience these
estimates are spot on. Both units battery life means you can get a few days
worth of use before you need to recharge, but if you are traveling you should
plan on bringing a charging solution with you.

The Edge 500 clearly consumes more power than the ForeRunner 310XT, and given
that, Garmin provided more software features to help. The Edge 500 is very
quick to auto power-off if it is not receiving any data, and this helps avoid
unnecessary battery consumption if you’ve stopped to take a long break or
after finishing a ride.

Advantage: ForeRunner 310XT, but just so.

* * *

## Display

The display on each device is similar, but there are numerous small differences.

The ForeRunner’s display is covered in glass - which I dropped and broke once,
resulting in an expensive repair bill - while the Edge’s display feels like a
type of plastic, but I’m not 100% positive on that.

![Display Comparison of Edge 500 and ForeRunner 310XT]({{ site.baseurl
}}/assets/images/20101213_7903_800px-300x225.jpg)

Both units provide a high-contrast, easy to read display, with an optional
backlight. Both units are exceptionally easy to see in outdoor light, although
they are both prone to glare if the sun hits them at just the right angle -
just like every other cycling computer I’ve ever used.

Each unit provides multiple pages of data, and multiple data items per page.
The ForeRunner limits you to 4 data fields maximum per page, with 4 total
pages, plus a workout specific page. Since the ForeRunner 310XT is a
multi-sport device, each sport setting has its own independent set of
customizable pages and data fields.

The Edge 500’s display is slightly taller than the ForeRunner’s, and as such
you can have up to 8 data fields per page. This also means that for those
pages with few fields, you can make certain key data items very large and easy
to read. The Edge 500 limits you to 3 pages of data, with one additional page
for workouts.

Advantage: neither. Both devices are champs with slight benefits to their
intended audience.

* * *

## Workouts

Another software feature that is different between the two units is the
Workouts feature. Both units have the ability to program complex workouts with
a variety of steps, targets, repeats, etc. Both let you create courses to
follow, and set alerts for time, distance, calories, or heart rate; the Edge
500 also adds support for cadence and power alerts.

The ForeRunner 310XT, however, has a great shortcut for creating interval
workouts. With a quick, easy-to-use 2-page setting wizard, you can select
intervals that are time or distance based, along with recoveries, and then
choose the number of repetitions and if you want warm-up and cool-down
intervals added. For a lot of workouts, this is all you need.

Programming the more advanced workouts in either device is not very difficult,
but it’s enough steps that many people will just avoid doing it altogether.
Programming these workouts is easier if you use Garmin Training Center and
then download the workout to the device, but this software isn’t the best
quality itself and I find myself just programming the workouts directly on the
devices.

Advantage: ForeRunner 310XT.

* * *

## Mounting Options

The ForeRunner 310XT is a sports watch, but there are a few different bike
mounting options available as well. I've found when doing multi-sport
activities it's better to just leave it on your wrist, but when primarily
biking, having it mounted on the bike was a better option.

![ForeRunner 310XT Quick Release Kit]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/images/IMG_0990-150x150.jpg)

The bike mount option I used for the ForRunner 310XT is the [Garmin Quick
Release
Kit](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B003V1TL9G/ref=as_li_ss_tl?ie=UTF8&tag=thenucbun-20&linkCode=as2&camp=217145&creative=399349&creativeASIN=B003V1TL9G).
This kit replaces the watch strap of the ForeRunner with one that includes a
mounting bracket that then snaps into place on an adaptor that mounts directly
to your bike with twist-ties. The replacement watch strap wasn't as
comfortable as the original strap that came with the ForeRunner, and it
increased the width of the device slightly, but overall this is a very good
mounting solution.

Garmin also sells a [Forerunner Bicycle Mount
Kit](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B000VK5BMQ/ref=as_li_ss_tl?ie=UTF8&tag=thenucbun-20&linkCode=as2&camp=217145&creative=399349&creativeASIN=B000VK5BMQ)for
ForeRunner devices that lets strap the device to the mount directly. I haven't
used this option, but it's a convenient way of solving the mounting problem as
well.

![Edge 500 with Quarter Turn Mounting Kit]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/images/IMG_0984-150x150.jpg)

The mounting solution for the Edge 500 is similar to the Quick Release Kit
option for the ForeRunner, but attaches to the bike in a very different way.
The mounting bracket itself uses high-quality bands (ethylene propylene diene
monomer, a synthetic rubber!) of various sizes to secure the mounting bracket
to the bike. The Edge 500 comes with a handful of different size bands and two
mounting brackets, so you can easily attach it to multiple bikes. Moving a
bracket to a different bike takes just seconds, but you can always buy another
[quarter turn bike mount
kit](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B004XHRJQ4/ref=as_li_ss_tl?ie=UTF8&tag=thenucbun-20&linkCode=as2&camp=217145&creative=399349&creativeASIN=B004XHRJQ4)if
two mounts are not enough.

![Edge 500 Bike Mount]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/images/IMG_0987-300x182.jpg "IMG\_0987")

The design of this mounting system is simple and elegant. The bands are
extremely strong and pliable enough that stretching them to secure the
mounting bracket is trivial. The back of the mounting bracket rests on either
your bicycle stem or handlebars using a rubber piece that keeps it from
moving. Once it's attached with the bands, the mount just isn't going to go
anywhere. &nbsp;The Edge 500 slides into the bracket quickly and once its
turned, it also isn't going to fly off, even on the bumpiest of routes.

![Edge 500 Bike Mount using the ForeRunner 310XT's Mount]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/images/IMG_0991-300x224.jpg "IMG\_0991")

One nice surprise is that the quarter-turn mounting bracket design is the same
between the ForeRunner 310XT's Quick Release Kit and the Edge 500's mounting
brackets. On my road bike, I'm actually using the bracket that came with the
ForeRunner's kit instead of the Edge 500's rubber band brackets - but only
because it was already attached. There is a small screw in this mounting
bracket that lets you change the orientation of the attached device, and this
is one difference between the two different devices. It only takes a couple of
seconds to change this, and chances are good you won't be going back and forth
between the two devices if you happen to have both (I only use the ForeRunner
310XT with its original wrist strap after buying the Edge 500).

![forerunner 310xt bicycle mount]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/images/IMG_0994-300x224.jpg "IMG\_0994")]

The quarter-turn quick release mounting design is a great solution for putting
either of these devices on your bike. It allows them to be installed and
removed in about a second without having to fuss with any tools. I especially
like to take off the devices whenever at a rest stop - a $200+ bike gadget
that's so easily pocketed is going to be tempting for the unscrupulous out
there.

Advantage: neither, both have excellent, and compatible, options.

* * *

## Training with Power

Both devices have great support for receiving data from any ANT+ enabled power
meter. Over time, the firmware has been updated on both and support for
showing more power data has been added. As of version 3.00 on the ForeRunner
310XT, and 2.40 on the Edge 500, the following power-related data fields are
available:

- Power (current power measurement)
- Power - % FTP
- Power - 30s Avg
- Power - 3s Avg (my personal favorite)
- Power - Avg
- Power - kilojoules
- Power - Lap
- Power - Max
- Power Zone (current power measurement)

I tend to ride with my display set to show the 3-second average power, the
cadence and the current lap time. This keeps me focused on what matters most
during training, but hides all the other data that might be distracting, but
it ultimately depends upon what kind of ride I am doing at the time.

If you are interested in training with power, but don't yet know much about
it, start by reading [Training and Racing with a Power
Meter](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/1934030554/ref=as_li_ss_tl?ie=UTF8&tag=thenucbun-20&linkCode=as2&camp=217145&creative=399349&creativeASIN=1934030554).
Training with power is great fun, but the bottom line is that you either need
to be analytical (okay, a bit of a geek), or have a coach that uses your power
data to keep track of your progress. Otherwise, you aren't likely to realize
the benefits of the tool.

Advantage: both devices are equally capable.

* * *

## Bottom Line

Both devices are excellent at what they do, and either is a powerful training
companion. If you are just a bicyclist, and do no multi-sport activities, then
the Edge 500 is the right choice for you. If you are into multi-sport, the
ForeRunner 310XT is all that you will need, but the Edge 500 does have a few
advantages, such as the large memory capacity.

The Edge 500 is also a little bit cheaper than the ForeRunner 310XT, especially if you already own a compatible heart-rate monitor or power meter.

![Garmin Connect screen shot]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/images/Screen-shot-2010-12-13-at-13.40.06-150x150.jpg "Garmin Connect screen shot")

A lot of folks are buying Garmin sports devices these days so that they can
upload and share their data using [Garmin's excellent
Connect](http://connect.garmin.com/) website. If you haven't tried Garmin
Connect, go there and give it a shot. It's worth the price of admission and
continues to get better as Garmin adds features, albeit rather slowly.

