---
title: 2011 Ride the Rockies - Day 3 - Tough day, but great views
date: 2011-06-14 14:37:34.000000000 -07:00
type: post
categories: [cycling, sports, travel]
tags: [bicycle, bond, crepes, edwards, food, mccoy, mountains, phippsburg,
ride the rockies, rtr, rtr2011, stagecoach reservoir, steamboat springs,
toponas, wolocott, yampa, yellow jacket pass]
author: chadwick
permalink: "/2011/06/14/2011-ride-the-rockies-day-3-tough-day-but-great-views/"
---
I wouldn’t have guessed from looking at the official route profile for the
Edwards to Steamboat Springs ride that it would turn out to be my hardest day
of the tour. Sure, the length of the route is 5 miles longer than the previous
2 days, but there were only two relatively small climbs shown on the profile,
and a long downhill into Steamboat itself. A piece of cake, especially when
compared to the Cottonwood Pass climb we did on day 1, right?

Not so much, as it turns out. The day started out fast and fun, with great
weather, calm winds, and a nice mostly downhill ride out of Edwards. Once we
hit Wolcott, the climbing began with a nice 1,000 ft climb and then a fast
descent through Bond and then ending at McCoy where aid station 2 was located.

The bad news we heard about a rider crashing and later dying on a descent
yesterday seemed to affect everyone I saw descending. There seemed to be a
little reluctance to go as fast as the previous two days. It might have just
been my own perception and awareness, but in general everyone seemed to be a
lot more cautious than I have seen before.

After leaving aid station 2, we began the biggest climb of a day, a nice,
long, winding climb along highway 131 heading towards Toponas. The terrain
changed from high desert to a slightly more lush wide valley, with plenty of
aspens and wildflowers to color the landscape along the way. This climb was
really a lot of fun – the grade was just right, steep but not too steep, and
it was long enough that you just needed to find your zone and keep the pedals
turning.

There was a short descent after this hill towards Toponas, and this is where
the trouble began. The mostly westwardly winds seemed to get stronger, and
became a headwind for most of our route. The speeds coming into Toponas were
much slower than I expected and once we reached aid station 3, we knew we were
only halfway done with the day.

I took a long break at aid station 3, and indulged in some Nutella and banana
crepes from one of the ride vendors. I’m sure it was an excessive amount of
calories, probably more than I burned on the entire ride, but it was
completely awesome and total worth it.

I wasn’t looking forward to the remainder of the ride, as we were going to
have a headwind almost the entire way. But, I had a couple of guardian angels
that showed up and made the next 20 miles amazing. A couple on a tandem that I
had been hopscotching with all day passed me on a windy straight-away, and
another rider and I latched on and used them as a nice, big windshield. I
stayed with them until aid station 5, going at least 5-10 mph faster than I
would have been able to maintain alone.

![Stagecoach Reservoir](/assets/images/2011_rtr_stagecoach_reservoir.jpg)


The Stagecoach Reservoir where aid station 5 was located is gorgeous, and
frankly, so was the remainder of the ride coming into Steamboat Springs. This
was my first time ever in this part of Colorado, and the first time to
Steamboat Springs. The route through the lush valley coming into town was
gorgeous, and hats off to whoever picked the route, and to making sure all the
road obstacles were well marked. It remained windy, but luckily the downhill
grade was enough to overcome it and I maintained a nice, fast pace coming all
the way into town, even with the few rolling hills along the route.

This turned out to be my longest day in the saddle thus far at 5 hours and 45
minutes. I also wound up doing quite a bit more work than before too, pedaling
out 2,977 kilojoules of work compared to 2,500 on the previous two days. Maybe
that crepe wasn’t too many calories after all.

_This post originally appeared on the Denver Post at
[http://blogs.denverpost.com/ridetherockies/2011/06/14/day-3-the-hardest-day/871/](http://blogs.denverpost.com/ridetherockies/2011/06/14/day-3-the-hardest-day/871/)_

