---
title: 2011 Ride the Rockies - Looking Back...
date: 2011-06-22 12:01:22.000000000 -07:00
type: post
categories: [cycling, sports, travel]
tags: [beer, berthoud pass, food, georgetown, granby, kremmling, rabbit ears
pass, ride the rockies, rtr, rtr2011, streamboat springs, winter park]
author: chadwick
permalink: "/2011/06/22/2011-ride-the-rockies-looking-back/"
---
About the time I crossed the Oklahoma border I knew my Colorado vacation was
officially over. The temperature gauge in the truck said 105 degrees, and it
got worse by the time I reached DFW (thankfully it was a bit cooler once I
reached the coast). One day prior, I was standing on top of Berthoud Pass
shivering in the ~40 degree temperatures after a nice climb up the pass.

## Day 6 - Granby to Georgetown

My last day of the tour went rather well. After reading&nbsp;[Ingrid's
description of her day
6](http://blogs.denverpost.com/ridetherockies/2011/06/17/d-d-d-done/1271/), I
am very glad I slept in and avoided all the bad weather. I usually wake up
around 5am while camping, but hearing the rain and feeling the cold is a great
motivator for not leaving the sleeping bag. I didn't make it out on the road
until almost 8am on Friday, and by that time the rain had stopped in Granby
and I never had any more for the remainder of the ride. It was still rather
cool, though - when I made it to Winter Park the local banks showed 44 degrees
on their clocks, and the sun never really peaked out of its clouds for the
rest of the day.

Day 6 was one of those days that looked rather intimidating in the route map
booklet. Berthoud Pass is not small, and I had driven it several times the
week before the ride. Based upon that, I assumed it was going to be the 2nd
hardest climb of the entire tour. In reality, it turned out to be one of the
easiest. According to my gadgets, the climb from where the pass begins in
earnest, just pass the Robber's Roost campground, was 6.3 miles with a 4.3%
average grade, climbing a grand total of 1821 ft. That's really rather mild
compared to many of the other climbs we did. Granted, it doesn't tell the full
story, as a lot of the climb occurred from Winter Park to this section of the
pass, but that was even a shallower grade.

![Chad on Berthoud Pass](/assets/images/2011_rtr_berthoud_pass.jpg)

Regardless, I arrived at the top a lot sooner and a lot fresher than I had
expected. It was certainly cold at the top, but thankfully the ride organizers
had one of the motor coaches waiting at the top for us with the engine running
to help riders warm up some. A nice hot coffee from the lovely ladies at Gypsy
Crepes, followed by the obligatory picture of the pass sign, and then a
relaxing warm-up in the bus was a great way to chill out after the climb.

The descent down from the pass was one of my favorites. I knew the road well
from having driven it so much the week before, so I felt comfortable going
full speed down. The several 15 mph switchback corners make great bike turns,
especially with the gigantic shoulders that exist on this pass. The road
quality, which seemed rather horrendous in my truck, was fine and mostly
smooth on the bicycle. And then there was the reality that the descent was
just plain fast, with little wind, little traffic, and really long. I barely
had to work all the way down to the intersection with I-70 at Empire, and even
after that the "climb" into Georgetown was really more of a gentle rolling
road and was a great way to end the tour.

## Day 5 - Steamboat Springs to Granby

![Snow on Rabbit Ears Pass](/assets/images/2011_rtr_rabbit_ears_pass.jpg)

My day 5, on the other hand, was not nearly as enjoyable as the last day. In
fact, it was pretty clearly the one "bad" day of the tour I had. Granted, it
started out fantastic with the climb up Rabbit Ears pass. I treated day 4 as
an active recovery ride, and that plus a good yoga session left me in great
condition to tackle that pass, especially since it started so early in the
ride. My legs felt great, my energy levels were dialed in just right, and the
altitude was relatively low so I was able to get into a climbing zone and hold
it, all the way to the top. Looking back at my ride data, I can say with
confidence that this was my best climb up a mountain ever. It was great fun,
and the views at the top of the pass were fantastic. Lots of snow left, but it
was melting so fast that all the streams in the meadows along the top were
raging torrents.

The quality of the ride changed quite a bit once we began the descent off the
pass. Instead of a lovely, fast descent, we encountered a rather stiff
headwind. It really limited my downhill speed and frankly mostly ruined the I
expected coming down off that pass. Perhaps that, plus the reality of 5 days
in a row of hard work, put me in a bit of a cranky mood for what was to
follow.

Towards the end of the descent, I hear a shout behind me about a rider passing
-- my first reaction was "yes!" since rarely had I noticed riders calling out
if they do pass on a descent. What followed was a pace-line of 6 riders, going
at least 40-45 mph (I was descending at 35).&nbsp;_Descending_ in a pace-line
is a rather dangerous and stupid behavior on a group ride, but what most
surprised me was that in the back of the pace-line was a rider with&nbsp;
**OFFICIAL** taped to his bag and helmet. He made the classic newbie-racer
mistake of cutting back over to the right when he thought he was well clear of
me. In reality, his rear tire brushed my front tire and nearly caused me to
wipe out. I was pissed-off enough when this happened to me, but then I saw the
same scene repeating itself for the next half mile of road, as the same group
would continue to pass small groups and then cut sharply over to the right
immediately in front of the riders they were passing. Incredibly reckless and
negligent behavior on a group ride, especially from someone who should have
known better - you can get away with that crap on a closed-course race
circuit, but don't do it on public roads with 2,000 other riders.

There's an well-known truism in life that it is your own reaction to events
that matter the most, not the events themselves. Certainly my reaction to the
above incident put me in a foul mood for the rest of the ride. The strong
headwinds didn't help. The bad road conditions and heavy traffic on US40
didn't help, either. But all of the normal little acts of rudeness and lack of
courtesy from other riders seemed twice as bad as they normally would have. I
really just did not have a good ride all the way to Kremmling. At the aid
station here, I took time to chill out (a cookie is always a great
de-stressor) and forget about the events that had transpired so I could focus
on the rest of the ride. It helped knowing that the road direction was
changing, and we were going to have a slight cross- and tail-wind for the
remainder of the ride.

In fact, that rest of that day was fantastic. The trip to Granby was fast and
scenic. The canyon near Hot Sulphur Springs was a joy to ride through, as all
of those narrow, tall canyons tend to be. Granby itself was my least favorite
town of the tour, but great beer was drunk, and good food was consumed, and
all troubles were put aside.

## Looking Back...

Despite the speed-bump on day 5, this year's Ride the Rockies was my favorite
bike tour to date. My training and fitness was the best I've done yet, and the
few weeks of time I was able to spend at altitude before the ride clearly made
a big difference for me. The views were stunning, especially of the Steamboat
Springs area, which was a brand new part of the state for me.

There are still a few little things I think the ride organizers could do
better. Having some basic medical supplies at each aid station is just a
no-brainer. People forget sunscreen, lubricant and anti-inflammatories, or
sometimes they just fall out of their pockets. Having a few of those things
available, or even if some of the aid station vendors would realize they could
sell these things, would really help out a lot of people that run into a
situation where they need some. Likewise, even though the organizers do a good
job pushing safety, clearly this message isn't getting through to a lot of the
riders, and the ride officials.

_This post also appears on the Denver Post at [http://blogs.denverpost.com/ridetherockies/2011/06/22/looking-back-on-ride-the-rockies-2011/1304](http://blogs.denverpost.com/ridetherockies/2011/06/22/looking-back-on-ride-the-rockies-2011/1304)_

