---
title: 2011 Ride the Rockies - Day 2 - Windy Climbs on the Way to Leadville
date: 2011-06-13 14:34:14.000000000 -07:00
type: post
categories: [cycling, sports, travel]
tags: [bicycling, buena vista, colorado, crested butte, edwards, leadville,
ride the rockies, rtr, rtr2011]
author: chadwick
permalink: "/2011/06/13/2011-ride-the-rockies-day-2-windy-climbs-on-the-way-to-leadville/"
---
Day 2 started out a bit nicer than day 1 – it was 10 degrees or so warmer in
Buena Vista than Crested Butte, making getting ready a whole lot more
enjoyable.

I decided to skip breakfast at camp and opted for the famous pancake breakfast
at the first aid station – this may have been a bad plan. The first 13 miles
were the hardest of my day – moderate cross- and head-winds the entire way,
and a gradual climb with no respite the entire way. Couple that with tired
muscles from day 1 and it was a rough way to start out the day. I wasn’t the
only one who felt this way – I heard lots of complaining along the way, and
some short tempers compared to day 1.

The pancake breakfast hit the spot as it always does, and gave me enough
energy to head directly to Leadville and bypassing aid station 2. The ride
into Leadville was surprisingly easy compared to the first 13 miles. The road
grade seemed more gradual, the winds miraculously died down completely, and
the temperatures were perfect.

The road quality in this section was the main issue, as we had little to no
shoulder and a sandy margin beyond that. Oh, and of course the altitude
continued to creep up and we did a large part of this section over 9,000 ft,
eventually reaching 10,200 ft in Leadville proper.

After a nice break in Leadville, it was time to leave town, go on a short,
fast descent, and then make our way up Tennessee Pass. This climb was
fantastic. The road grade was very gradual making the climb up to 10,424 ft a
pretty easy one.

The descent down from Tennessee Pass was fast, mostly straight, with only a
little road traffic to contend with. This descent ended too quickly though,
and then it was time to climb Battle Mountain. At 59 miles into the ride, and
the hardest climb of the day, this climb wore a lot of us out. It was much
steeper than the other climbs up the day and the temperatures had warmed
enough by then to make shedding clothes a necessity. The road was narrow,
rough, and with lots of traffic, but the views were spectacular.

After Battle Mountain, we had a fast 15 mile descent into Minturn, followed by
another descent along US 6 into Edwards. That section of US 6 was almost
entirely downhill, but there was some occasional strong winds that made the
descent quite a lot of work.

The overnight setup in Edwards is nice – maybe a bit more spread out than we’d
like, but everything is nice and clean. I made sure to visit the yoga class
this evening to help work out some kinks after a couple of hard days of
riding. We’ll see how that helps with day 3 trip to Steamboat Springs!

_This post originally appeared on the Denver Post at
[http://blogs.denverpost.com/ridetherockies/2011/06/13/windy-climbs-on-the-way-to-leadville/764/](http://blogs.denverpost.com/ridetherockies/2011/06/13/windy-climbs-on-the-way-to-leadville/764/)_

