---
title: Breaking the High-Information Habit
date: 2011-02-16 20:56:03.000000000 -08:00
type: post
categories: [technology]
tags: [linkedin]
author: chadwick
permalink: "/2011/02/16/breaking-the-high-information-habit/"
---
In January of 2011 I took a deliberate break from my high-information diet. No
news, television or on-line, no blogs, no Facebook, no Twitter for a whole
month. It was awesome, and highly effective at completely breaking my
high-information diet habit.

I've been a voracious consumer of information since I was a kid. As part of
the first home computing generation, I grew up with the assumption that I had
access to information on-line without much effort. In the first few years it
was just the traditional dial-up bulletin board model, but quickly that gave
way to the predecessor of the Internet available through the local
universities and proto-ISPs. The amount of information and news we had
available then was simply amazing, and it has only continued to grow since
then.

It wasn't difficult to imagine that we'd have access to this much information
back then - science fiction authors and nerds have been thinking along those
lines for much longer than I've been around, but to actually witness coming to
fruition was wonderful - and so easy to take for granted.

The bottom-line is that many of us, and especially me, are addicted to
information. News is no longer fed to us in an hour long program on television
very night; there are plenty of young adults now who never lived when there
were no 24/7 news channels. We all have the expectation that news and
information is freely available anytime, and all the time, wherever we are.

As technology continued to advance, so did our ease of accessing this wealth
of information. We could get all of our news via the web, and could skip the
cable networks if we wanted. Eventually, we could watch the cable networks
live over the Internet at the office, or wherever we might be. A plethora of
applications let us aggregate and present all of this information in one place
for our consumption, in real-time. The upshot being that there is ample
opportunity to be distracted by information at any time - there's no waiting
any more.

We certainly don't need 24/7 news and the Internet to procrastinate, but they
both sure make it easy for anyone who works with a computer. As mobile
computing devices become more common place, I believe we'll start to see
procrastination in the hands of everyone. Just wait until the clerk at Taco
Bell is too busy checking Facebook instead of taking your order! Oh wait, you
mean that's already happened?

<!--more-->  
When I decided to take a month off from information I did so deliberately with
the intent to break the procrastination habit. I was taking several months off
of work, and without the deadlines imposed by business needs, I knew I would
have a tendency to slow down a bit and find ways to kill time. That was great,
for a few weeks, but quickly I wanted to get back down to work and focus on
some big personal projects. Stopping the information habit was one tool I had
planned to use to make sure I'd focus on what I needed to, not just what was
at hand.

Breaking the habit turned out to be surprisingly easy. There were a few days
of the expected psychological addiction withdrawal symptoms to contend with,
but they were blessedly minor. The bigger hurdle to overcome was the feeling
that I was missing out on STUFF! THINGS were happening and I wasn't keeping
up! Naturally, none of it really mattered in the end.

In fact, looking back on what actually occurred in the news during January and
early February, it is remarkable how little actually occurred that was worth
paying attention to. The big stories during this time period? The shootings in
Arizona, the crisis in Egypt, and if you enjoy sensationalized stories, the
massive bird kill in Arkansas or wherever.

All of these stories were impossible not to hear about, even without the news.
All I had to do was visit the local coffee shop or interact with another human
and these invariably would come up in conversation, direct or overheard.

The shooting story seemed to cause the most emotional reaction from the people
I saw discussing it, as is the tendency for that sort of tragedy.

The crisis in Egypt had the appeal of seeing something positive possibly
occur, in a region of the world where it is so desperately needed, and it's
incredibly appealing to human nature to feel like you are a part of history as
it happens.

The bird kill story, well, that's just a classic example of sensationalism
that's exacerbated by the existence of the 24/7 news & information society.
Would it have really had such a strong headline impact if there had been a day
or two to gather more information before the panic-like headlines appeared?
Perhaps...

<!--more-->  
The reality is that not one of these stories had any impact on my life - or on
most of humanity's life for that matter. The simple existence of quick and
efficient information delivery creates an artificial feeling that this stuff
is really important, and that it is important RIGHT NOW! But in reality, you
could read a synopsis of world and local events once a month, or even once a
year, and probably be better informed about the world than you are right now.
You'd simply have less noise to sift through before getting to what really
matters.

I didn't miss world and local news one bit during my hiatus - in fact, I
haven't picked up the habit of checking it again. I'm finding it much more
effective to discuss events with other people rather than constantly reading
or watching about the latest events. If I need to dive into a story, I can do
that after I determine if it's worth spending time on.

I do have a bit of consternation on the news and happenings that are
technology related, as it affects my career more directly than traditional
world events. But here, too, I think I'm finding that a low-information diet
is actually more efficient than trying to constantly keep up with the
never-ending surge of what's available. That sounds like a key to success to
me - pay more attention to what really matters, and ignore what doesn't. Life
is ultimately an equation of time, and the more of that we can make use of,
the more effective, productive, and happier our lives will be.

Now, if you excuse me, I have to go post a picture of the beer I'm drinking on
Facebook.

